 Airplane Description                                                            DA 42 AFM 
7.5    LANDING GEAR 
The landing gear is a fully retractable, hydraulically operated, tricycle landing gear. Struts 
for the landing gear are air oil assemblies. 
The hydraulic pressure for the landing gear operation is provided by an electrically powered 
hydraulic pump, which is activated by a pressure switch, when the required pressure is 
too low. Electrically actuated hydraulic valves, which are operated with the gear selector 
switch, provide the required hydraulic pressure for the movement of the landing gear. 
The gear selector switch is located on the instrument panel. The switch must be pulled 
out  before  it  is  moved  to  UP  or  DOWN  position.  Gear  extension  normally  takes 
6 - 10 seconds. 
When the landing gear is retracted, the main wheels retract inboard into the center wing 
and the nose wheel retracts forward into the nose section. Hydraulic pressure on the 
actuators keeps the landing gear in the retracted position. A pressurized gas container 
acts as an accumulator which keeps the system pressure constant by replacing the volume 
lost due to the normal actuator leakages. This prevents a permanent starting of the 
hydraulic pump in flight. 
Springs assist the hydraulic system in gear extension and locking the gear in the down 
position. After the gears are down and the downlock hooks engage, springs maintain force 
on each hook to keep it locked until it is released by hydraulic pressure. 
The three green lights directly next to the landing gear operating switch illuminate to 
indicate that each gear is in the correct position and locked. If the gear is in neither the 
full up nor the full down position, a red warning light on the instrument panel illuminates. 
Should one power lever be placed in a position below approx. 20 % while the landing gear 
is retracted, a warning horn sounds to alert the pilot that the gear is retracted. If installed 
a CHECK GEAR caution is indicated on the PFD additionally. The same warning appears 
if the flaps move into position LDG (fully extended) while the gear is retracted. 
  Page 7 - 14    Rev. 8       15-Dec-2017                         Doc. No. 7.01.05-E 
----------------------- Page 317-----------------------
 DA 42 AFM                                                            Airplane Description 
To test the gear warning system (refer to 4A.6.1 - PRE-FLIGHT INSPECTION) push the 
test button close by the gear selector switch. The aural gear alert should appear. 
                                         CAUTION 
               If   the   aural   alert   does   not   appear,   an   unscheduled 
               maintenance is necessary. 
To prevent inadvertent gear retraction on ground, an electric squat switch prevents the 
hydraulic valve from switching if the master switch is on and the gear extension switch 
is placed in the UP position. 
After take-off, the gear should be retracted before an airspeed of 156 KIAS is exceeded. 
The landing gear may be extended at any speed up to 194 KIAS. 
The landing gear is designed to be manually operated in the event of failure. Since the 
gear is held in the retracted position by hydraulic pressure, gravity will allow the gear to 
extend if the system fails for any reason. To extend and lock the gears in the event of 
failure, it is only necessary to relieve the hydraulic pressure by means of the emergency 
gear extension lever, which is located under the instrument panel to the left of the center 
console. Pulling this lever releases the hydraulic pressure and allows the gear to fall free. 
Before pulling the emergency gear extension lever, place the gear selector switch in the 
DOWN position. 
                                            NOTE 
               If the emergency gear extension has been pulled due to an 
               emergency, the system has to be checked before pushing 
               the lever in again. 
The nose gear is steerable by the use of full rudder pedal travel. A gear damping element, 
incorporated in the nose gear steering system, prevents shimmy tendencies. When the 
gear is retracted, the nose wheel centers as it enters the wheel well, and the steering 
linkage disengages to reduce pedal loads in flight. 
  Doc. No. 7.01.05-E    Rev. 8        15-Dec-2017                          Page 7 - 15 
----------------------- Page 318-----------------------
 Airplane Description                                                           DA 42 AFM 
Hydraulic Gear Extension System Schematic 
The main landing gear of the DA 42 is extended with three hydraulic cylinders. The 
following schematic Figures show the system conditions for each operating mode. 
In Figure 1 the extension of the landing gear is shown. To reduce the amount of pumped 
hydraulic fluid during this operation, the return flow is partly led into the feeding flow of 
the system. 
The Figure below shows the system status when the landing gear is extended. All hydraulic 
cylinders are under high pressure. 
  Page 7 - 16    Rev. 8        15-Dec-2017                        Doc. No. 7.01.05-E 
----------------------- Page 319-----------------------
 DA 42 AFM                                                          Airplane Description 
The operating mode for the retraction of the landing gear is shown in the next Figure. 
While energizing the right hydraulic valve, the fluid flow in the hydraulic system is started 
due to different piston areas of the landing gear cylinders although the pressure on both 
sides of the system is equal. 
While the landing gear is retracted both valves are energized and excessive hydraulic 
fluid on one side is drained into the tank. This configuration of the system is shown in the 
following Figure. 
  Doc. No. 7.01.05-E    Rev. 8        15-Dec-2017                        Page 7 - 17 
----------------------- Page 320-----------------------
 Airplane Description                                                      DA 42 AFM 
For an emergency extension of the landing gear, the hydraulic fluid can pass through an 
emergency extension valve so that the gear is extended by gravity. The condition of the 
system is shown in the Figure below. 
  Page 7 - 18    Rev. 8      15-Dec-2017                      Doc. No. 7.01.05-E 
----------------------- Page 321-----------------------
 DA 42 AFM                                                          Airplane Description 
Wheel Brakes 
Hydraulically operated disk brakes act on the wheels of the main landing gear. The wheel 
brakes are individually operated by means of toe pedals. 
Parking Brake 
The lever is located on the small center console under the instrument panel and is in the 
upper position when the brakes are released. To operate the parking brake, pull the lever 
downwards until it catches. Brake pressure is built up by multiple operation of the toe brake 
pedals, and is maintained until the parking brake is released. To release, the lever is 
pushed upwards. 
  Doc. No. 7.01.05-E    Rev. 8        15-Dec-2017                        Page 7 - 19 
----------------------- Page 322-----------------------
