 Mass and Balance                                                               DA 42 AFM
6.1    INTRODUCTION
In order to achieve the performance and flight characteristics described in this Airplane
Flight Manual and for safe flight operation, the airplane must be operated within the
permissible mass and balance envelope.
The pilot is responsible for adhering to the permissible values for loading and center of
gravity (CG). In this, he should note the movement of the CG due to fuel consumption.
The permissible CG range during flight is given in Chapter 2.
The procedure for determining the flight mass CG position is described in this chapter.
Additionally a comprehensive list of the  equipment approved for this airplane exists
(Equipment  List).  The  set  of  items  marked  as  'installed'  constitutes  the  Equipment
Inventory.
Before the airplane is delivered, the empty mass and the corresponding CG position are
determined and entered in Section 6.3 - MASS AND BALANCE REPORT.
                                           NOTE
               Following equipment changes the new empty mass and the
               corresponding CG position must be determined by calculation
               or by weighing.
               Following repairs or repainting the new empty mass and the
               corresponding CG position must be determined by weighing.
               Empty mass, empty mass CG position, and the empty mass
               moment must be certified in the Mass and Balance Report
               by authorized personnel.
   Page 6 - 2    Rev. 8        15-Dec-2017                        Doc. No. 7.01.05-E
----------------------- Page 271-----------------------
 DA 42 AFM                                                             Mass and Balance
                                           NOTE
               Refer  to  Section  1.6  -  UNITS  OF  MEASUREMENT  for
               conversion of SI units to US units and vice versa.
                                           NOTE
               The mass of the winter kit - ventilation is negligible. The mass
