 Maintenance
8.6    CLEANING AND CARE
                                         CAUTION
               The airplane must be kept clean. The bright surface prevents
               the structure from overheating.
                                         CAUTION
                    Excessive dirt deteriorates the flight performance.
8.6.1  PAINTED SURFACES
The entire surface of the airplane is painted with a white weatherproof two component
paint. Nevertheless, it is recommended to protect the airplane against moisture and
dampness. It is also recommended not to store the airplane outside for long periods of
time.
Dirt, insects, etc. can be removed with water alone and if necessary with a mild detergent.
An automotive paint cleaner can be used for stubborn spots. For best results, clean the
airplane after the day's flying is ended, so that the dirt will not become ingrained.
Oil stains, exhaust stains, etc. on the lower fuselage skin can be removed with a cold
detergent. Before starting, ensure that the detergent does not affect the surface finish.
Use commercial automotive preservatives without silicone additives to conserve the paint
finish.
8.6.2  CANOPY AND REAR DOOR
The canopy, rear door and rear window should be cleaned with 'Plexiklar' or any other
acrylic glass detergent if available; otherwise use lukewarm water. Final cleaning should
be carried out with a clean piece of chamois leather or soft cloth. Never rub or polish dry
acrylic glass.
  Page 8 - 14    Rev. 8       15-Dec-2017                         Doc. No. 7.01.05-E
----------------------- Page 393-----------------------
                                                                            Handling, Care,
 DA 42 AFM
                                                                               Maintenance
8.6.3  PROPELLER
Damage and malfunctions during operation must be inspected by authorized personnel.
Surface
The manufacturer uses PU paint or acrylic paint which is resistant to almost any solvent.
The blades may be treated with commercial automotive cleaning agents or preservatives.
The penetration of moisture into the wooden core must be avoided by all means. Should
doubts arise, an appropriately rated inspector must be consulted.
8.6.4  ENGINE
Engine cleaning is part of the scheduled inspections.
8.6.5  INTERIOR SURFACES
The interior should be cleaned using a vacuum cleaner. All loose items (pens, bags etc.)
should be removed or properly stored and secured.
All instruments can be cleaned using a soft dry cloth. Plastic surfaces should be wiped
clean using a damp cloth without any cleaning agents.
The leather interior should be treated with leather sealer within 3 months since new, and
then at intervals of 3 to 6 months. Clean the leather interior with an appropriate mild leather
cleaning agent and a soft cleaning brush for leather.
Note that the acrylic glass windows transmit the ultraviolet radiation from the sun.
  Doc. No. 7.01.05-E    Rev. 8         15-Dec-2017                        Page 8 - 15
----------------------- Page 394-----------------------
 Handling, Care,
                                                                            DA 42 AFM
